---js
const title = "'The problem with India'";
const date = "Sat 28 Jun 2025 09:27:37 AM EDT";
const tags = [ "software engineering", "philosophy" ];
---

A former classmate wrote on LinkedIn:

"The problem with India is that for every one guy  working 8 hours a day, there
are 10 willing to do 16 hours and it becomes the norm."

While I agree with what he said, his observation can be analyzed further.  He's
assuming that the only way to measure productivity is the number of hours
invested.

In the age of machines this model of measuring productivity doesn't hold.  For
example, the sum total of the number of hours invested by all the employees to
create the first iteration of Google search would be much less than the time
saved by the users to search websites they were looking for using Google search.
This is true for many software tools.

My former-batchmate's model of estimating productivity doesn't take into
account the amount of time saved by working for fewer hours but doing creative
work, which ends up saving a lot of time in the future. Another example that
comes to mind if that of, vim. Very creative software engineers who created
tools like vim ended up saving millions of hours in text editing.

The other point to keep in mind is that the cause of creativity is boredom.  If
one is always doing repetitive work and do not have any free time to reflect,
they will not be creative. So, I think "the problem with India" is that the
Indian companies don't know how to nurture or leverage creativity, and have a
wrong model of measuring the productivity.
