---js
const title = "Steve Jobs, the idea of the philosopher king and the Buddha";
const date = "2025-06-28T22:30:00+05:30";
const tags = ["software engineering", "philosophy"];
const draft = true;
---

There's this famous video featuring Steve Jobs about how managers should be
chosen.  It's an interesting take on appointment managers which is
counterintuitive to the current ways in which interviews are done.

As far as I know, the management interviews today involve the usual
prostitution of one's self, answering the cookie-cutter questions about how
passionate one is for the managerial job and how they would handle the
responsibilities, given one's previous experience.

### Steve Jobs

Steve Jobs' way as illustrated in the video goes opposite the conventional
wisdom.  It postulates that the best way to employ a manager is by finding
someone who does not want to be the manager.  This goes exactly opposite to
what's practiced today, especially if one had to interview someone with Steve's
way in mind.  Imagine, how the interview would be?  The candidate would have to
convince the interviewer why they don't want the job.  What would the interview
questions be like?  These all are some interesting directions to reflect on.


### The Idea of the Philosopher King

The hypothetical idea of the philosopher king is comes from Western philosophy.
The ideal king, according to it, is a philosopher king.  One who posseses all
the philosophical knowledge obtained through study.  According to The Republic
by Socrates, in which the idea of the philosopher king was first presented, the
philosopher king must have truthfulness, temperance, justice and good memory []
(At least one of which is not possessed by Biden, but I forget which one!).
So, the ideal king must acquire philosophical wisdom from reading the available
philosophical texts and then be the possesser of the mentioned virtues in order
to actually use the philosophical wisdom to govern the public.  Note that there
isn't a concept of consciously practicing detachment here.  We also note that
the idea of the Philosopher King was challenged by citing examples of rogue
philosophers, claiming that a study of philosophy doesn't lead to wisdom but
rogueness.

### Buddha

Buddha wasn't a philosopher king but a prince who became a philosopher.   Owing
to his sensitive disposition for the pain felt by others he became disenchanted
with the world and decided to find a the reasons for his and others' suffering
and how to alleviate it.  This made him detach himself from the kingly
pleasures and resort to the forest, where he found enlightement, etc.  Now, the
key idea that I want to press-on is that of detachment.  The detachment, in his
case arose from empathizing with the suffering of others.   But, we observe
that there could be other reasons for becoming detached as well.  This is also,
observed by Schopenhauer as he was influenced by Oriental religions.
Schopenhauer wrote that in order to understand something we need to get
detached from it.  This was also observed by the female French philosopher ""
who wrote that "You can either love a woman or understand her.".  Note that the
love in her quote is the love that comes from attachment, not the the detached
love, like Karuna.

### The relation between the three

With a little bit of reflection on the three ideas, the intelligent reader
would already know what I am going to say.  That, is I believe that Steve's way
is the right way to find a good manager.  And he is talking about the
philosopher king, however the way of finding the truth in Western philosophy
leads to the philosophers becoming rogues.  What leads to the 

The absolute truth cannot be found by reading the work of philosophy
