---js const title = "\"A perfect language\""; const date = "2025-07-03T13:30:00+05:30"; const tags = ["language", "philosophy"]; const draft = true;---

How would a "perfect language" be created? By "perfect", I mean a language that is independent of time and space. By independent of time, I mean that it cannot be refined further, i.e. it can be understood across time and by independent of space I mean the pronunciation can only change due to human error, not due to people having different "accents".

Most natural languages are learnt by hearing others speak.  Like when a baby is born, the parents teach it the language it hears from them. However, a "perfect language" would not need a speaker to learn from.  Note that it can be learned from a speaker as well, just that it wouldn't necessarily _need_ a speaker to learn from.  It can be learned without hearing any sound whatsoever. It would be like how Math is done, i.e. it would be created and can be learned in silence, not how English and other common languages were created and are learned using words that are spoken in certain areas or by certain people.

Just like there is an objective method of deriving Math results from silence by anyone, there must be some methods of deriving sounds for specific ideas by anyone using those rules from the absence of sound, i.e. silence.

In other words, one should not need hear anything in order to speak the language perfectly.  Then it would be the language of the Gods, or a "perfect langauge".

How will the idea of "something", X, existing in time t1 be communicated across to time t2 where it doesn't exist?  There are two points here, one is that X, just like in Math, needs to be defined using the language before being used so that X is freed-from the contextual knowledge at t1. And if X doesn't need any context-freeing then it represents an idea that is timeless.

So, the whole point of the language is that it should be free from [System 1](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thinking,_Fast_and_Slow) and should only need System 2 to understand and create it. Freeing it from System 1 means that it is independent of time and space.