---js
const title = "What the AI will not replace?";
const date = "2025-09-01T12:30:00-04:00";
const tags = ["philosophy", "software engineering"];
const draft = false;
---


A discussion regarding what AI will not replace in software engineering led to
this post. AI cannot replace what it doesn't have, which is self-consciousness.
The mental manifestation of self-consciousness is reflection. And the physical
manifestation of it is the action which is taken after reflection (this, in my
opinion, is what is 'dharma').

'Dharma' may mean different things in different fields. 'Dharma' in the context of
software engineering is basically what [Dr. McIlroy had refered to as 'negative coding'](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Douglas_McIlroy#Views_on_computing).
It's the process of removing code instead of adding it making the software simpler. (My own attempt [at negative coding](https://github.com/m-chaturvedi/undupes/)).

'Dharma' process can be explained very easily. If an action is taken without
reflection, it's not dharma, unless the instincts which are the cause of action
have been trained with the process which is created with reflection. This
process of training the instincts is commonly referred to as 'culture'. So,
many a time, during code reviews, the software engineers would instinctually
know that a piece of code has problems. This is because of the 'culture', i.e.,
they have gone through so much code that they have refined their instincts with
the culture of software engineering 'dharma', so even without consciously
reflecting, they know that the piece of code that they are reviewing has a
problem.

AI is trained with the latter method, that is, its 'instincts' are being
refined to the extent that it starts doing things which come out of a lot of
reflection. So, it's trying to replicate the dharma of software engineering.
What it lacks is self-consciousness. What this means is that, unlike humans who
can remove a piece of code from what they wrote after reflecting on it, AI
cannot remove a piece of code from its own programming. That is, AI cannot do
negative coding on the code it created without interacting with any external
agents other than the code and its own programming.

This can be said in another way. Humans can evolve by just meditating like the
Buddha; a piece of program cannot just sit and evolve itself. Evolution is like
'negative coding'. And the final destination of 'negative coding' is zeroness,
which, unlike the Buddha, computers cannot experience, or reach, or meditate
upon.

Typos fixed using ChatGPT.
