---js 
const title = "How CEOs bullshit!"; const date = "2025-09-05T08:30:00-04:00"; const tags = ["philosophy"]; const draft = false;
---

Recently, I was sharing with someone how CEOs bullshit, which led to this post. There are many videos available of CEOs of many companies announcing various things. So, it's easy to understand the thinking of CEOs at least as far as the product announcements go.

Let's first define bullshitting. Bullshitting, for our purposes, is the opposite of being forthcoming. It's basically hiding the truth with a wrapper idea, really believing in the wrapper idea. Believing it with all your heart, to the point that you can convince everyone that the wrapper is the true intention of your actions and not the real truth.

I am not saying that products CEOs sell are always useless. What I am saying is that there's always the real truth and the wrapper concealing it, and therein between the two lies bullshit.

Now CEOs have to constantly cover the fact that they created a product because they can make a lot of money with the wrapper that the product is actually useful for society and customers. The fact that they are doing it for the money is not something that they will accept readily even when explicitly pointed out, it will be only known via the context.

They will always have a complete and total belief in the product that they are selling, even if it's useless. They bullshit with total confidence their customers and listeners that it's not the fact that this product will make them profit that is the driving force but the fact that they believe that this product is useful for the customers.  They would look down upon their competition, however good that is, find faults in the competition's products and customers, make up personal stories and use other cognitive biases to promote their product.

This style of bullshiting is close to how [Nature decieves us as well](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maya_(religion)), that deserves a long write-up, though.