---js 
const title = "Woh mujhse hue humqalaam — Sufi Tabassum"; const date = "2025-09-05T08:30:00-04:00"; const tags = ["poetry", "urdu", "farida khanum"]; const draft = false;
---

We believe that all poetry is due to overwhelming emotions that the poet cannot contain within himself and needs to express via words. 
There are a spectrum of emotions that lead to a poem, but of course, many a time, a specific one stands out. This poem, we believe, is one such poem.
All the couplets which have been sung have the poet trying to juxtapose two situations/ideas that he's not able to reconcile, leading to the exclamation, 'Allah, Allah'. 

_Woh mujhse hue humqalam, Allah Allah_<br>
_Kahan mein kahan ye maqaam, Allah Allah_

I had the great fortune of being a conversation with her,<br>
I am not worthy of this achievement, _Allah Allah_

[Here the poet is not able reconcile with the fact that he just spoke with her. He thinks that he is not even worthy of being able to speak with her.]

_Ye *ru-e-darakhshan, ye zulfon ke saaye,_<br>
_Ye hungaama-e-sub-o-shaam, Allah Allah_

These bright faces like daylight, and these dark shades of hair,<br>
The commotion of day and night, _Allah Allah_

[Here the poet very tastefuly compares the glow of the beloved's face and her dark hair with the light of the day and the darkness of the night.
Notice that the he's not able to reconcile the day and night here, just like he's disturbed by the lovers face and her hair.  This leads to a more romantic interpretation, that  all his days and nights go in remembering his lover.]

_Wo sehma hua aansuon ka *talaatum_<br>
_Wo aab-e-rawan *be-khiraam, Allah Allah_

That stifled gush of tears,<br>
That flow of tears, unbridled, Allah, Allah.

[Here the poet finds the stifled storm of tears and the uncontrolled crying irreconcilable.]

_Wo zabt-e-sukhan mein labon ki khamoshi_<br>
_Nazar ka wo *lutf-e-kalaam, Allah Allah_

That trying to conceal the words by not speaking them from lips,<br>
That letting all be known coquettishly through your gaze, Allah Allah!

[This is perhaps the best sher of the Ghazal. The exclaimation Allah Allah is because he finds it difficult to bring to terms the restraint of words and the narration of the eyes.]

— Sufi Tabassum

——————

ru-e-darakhshan= bright face<br>
talaatum= storm<br>
be-khiram= disgraceful, untasteful<br>
lutf-e-kalaam= pleasures of conversation

When sung with the flair of Farida Khanum, who sprinkles the shers with just enough silence before ‘Allah, Allah’ to convey the poet’s mind, the poem becomes all the memorable!
[Youtube link](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UC_-DoCh10U)

