---js 
const title = "Nahin nigaah mein manzil to — Faiz Ahmed Faiz"; const date = "2023-04-06T00:00:00-04:00"; const tags = ["poetry", "urdu", "faiz", "old blog"]; const draft = false;
---

Today we translate one of the most famous poems by Faiz, Nahin nigaah mein manzil.
The emotions that the poet expresses in this poem, we believe, orignitate from the attempt to
reconcile the situations as they are with how he'd like them to be.

All poetry, perhaps all art, is an attempt to reduce the incompleteness in the world,
or shall we say, metmorphosize the incompleteness?  The poet believes in a certain idea of
perfection which he compares with reality and tries to complete the imperfections with his poetry.

In this case, the poet is trying to remedy the imperfections of the situations by very tastefully
letting us know that we mustn't lose heart, and do the best possible, meanwhile coming up with wonderful methaphors, 😀.

 

_Nahin nigaah mein manzil to, justajoo hi sahi,_<br>
_Nahin visaal mayassar to, aarzoo hi sahi_

If the destination is not in sight, at least we have the desire to reach,<br>
If a meeting isn't possible, we make do with the yearning.
(This second line is very beautiful done, and can be even on it's own.)

_Na tan mein khoon faraaham, na ashq aakhon mein,_<br>
_Namaaz-e-shauq to vajib hai, be-vuzoo hi sahi_

_No blood flows in the body, the eyes are bereft of tears,_<br>
_The prayer for desires is acceptable, even if it is without the ablutions_

(The namaaz, when offered to the Gods, is done after washing oneself with water.
Here the poet very tastefully extends that idea to _namaaz-e-shauq_,
by which we'd imagine he means remembering the loved one, lamenting her absence and desiring to meet her.
But the ablutions for lamenting the beloved are done with not water, but blood and tears!)

(So, he's saying it is tolerable to lament the beloved and pray for your desire for her,
even when you've cried all the tears out and bled-out all the blood, and there's nothing left to 'cleanse' yourself with!)

_Kisi tarah to jame bazm, maiqade waalon,_<br>
_Nahin jo badaah-o-sagar to, haao-hu hi sahi_

Let's have a gathering, somehow, my bar-mates,<br>
If not the globlet and the wine, a spectacle would do.<br>
(If the alcohol is not available, let's just meet to create a some commotion.)

_Gar intezaar kathin hai to, jab talaq ai dil,_<br>
_Kisi ke vaada-e-fardaa ki guftoo hi sahi_

If the wait is too tough, then my impatient heart,<br>
Just chatting about her unfulfilled promise would be fine.

_Dayaar-e-gair mein mehram agar nahin koi,_<br>
_To 'Faiz' zikra-e-vatan apne roobaru hi sahi_

If there are no confidants / fellow countrymen in a foreign land<br>
Then why not just speak about your own land country to yourself?

(If you can't find anyone from your own country in a foreign land then
just remind yourself of your home country)

I am inclined to interpret the second line in an alternate way as well.
Could it mean "If there are no fellow country-men in a foreign land,
why not discuss the country which is in front of you?".  _zikra-e-vatan apne rubaru_
may even mean "mention of the country in front of you"?

[Youtube link.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xHcwdHC8ETA)
 
