---js 
const title = "The Cornell note-taking system and different groups of people"; const date = "2025-09-14T01:30:00-04:00"; const tags = ["philosophy"]; const draft = false;
---

I wrote about the [Cornell note-taking system](https://m-chaturvedi.github.io/blog/009/) in a previous post, and how I had found it quite an interesting way to take notes.

I was wondering how it could be used to look at different kinds of people that inhabit the world. The equivalent of the main section of the notes would be the people who like to take instructions. They like to do what they are instructed to do, and what they see others doing—just taking notes. This, like the main section, would be the largest chunk of the world’s population. This population, akin to what the main section is used for, likes copying what others are doing without questioning or reflecting on it. This group is that of the common, non-scientific people.

Then there is the group of people equivalent to the left margin. These would be the questioning types, who like to question everything consciously but do not necessarily reflect on it. This group would be like the average scientists and engineers.

Then there would be the group of people who like to reflect on things but do not necessarily question them. This would be the bottom margin in the Cornell system. This group comprises of managers.

Finally, there is the group of people who like to both question things and reflect on them, on how they connect to the overall scheme of things. This group consists of the great philosophers, exceptional scientists, engineers, managers, diplomats, etc.