On Questioning

In this post, we would try to understand how to ask a question. We believe that in order to know the answer to any question, we need to understand how to ask a question. Like we discussed in the previous post, when we analyze something, i.e., use only our minds to interact with an idea, the origin of everything is in its complement; similarly, the origin of an answer is in its complement, that is, the question.

Often, when we ask a question, we are already expecting a certain answer. Like when we ask if it's going to rain tonight, we already have in our subconscious the current season, the climatic patterns of the place we are living in, etc., which make us biased towards a specific answer. A simple way to observe this is by trying to guess an answer to the question, with the same consciousness in which the question was asked. If, in our minds, there's a certain answer that we expect, then we have not actually asked the question if it's going to rain; we actually have asked whether our guess is correct or not, because our mind wasn't totally neutral when asking the question.

Since we had bias in our minds, we haven't yet arrived at the origin of the answer; that is, we haven't really asked the question whether it's going to rain. Until we can ask a question in a state of mind that is free from all bias, Nature will not tell us the answer to the question. And as soon as we ask the question in an unbiased way, we will have a complement to the question, which is the answer, created in our minds.

This is a common mistake we make when asking questions: we don't ask them in a neutral way, and we are prone to all manner of cognitive biases.
