---js
const title = "On the interpretation of God as the balance between the feminine and the masculine"; const date = "2025-11-27T15:00:00-04:00"; const tags = ["philosophy"]; const draft = false;
---


In this post we give an interpretation of God. There are two common understandings of God, one is prophet-based and another one is Nature-based.
In the prophet-based interpretation, we have a religious-head or a guru, who is considered a representative of God. The prophet is honored and
remembered like a God. And in the Nature-based interpretation Nature is considered as a representative of God. Nature is worshipped and is assumed to be the representative of God.

For our purposes we hypothesize that the prophet-based interpretation is the masculine interpretation and the Nature-based interpretation is
the feminine interpretation. We hypothesize that it’s the balance between the feminine and the masculine that is God.

In the masculine interpretation, the prophet themselves is not considered God, but an agent of God, and the prophet is almost always non-violent;
they however, have a perfect understanding of the feminine, Nature, and their understanding is shown via the changes in Nature.
These, we believe, are what are referred to as the "acts of God". The population which believes in the prophet thus takes heed of what they say,
because of their perfect understanding of Nature’s laws.

In the Nature-based understanding, the population is directly advised to interact with Nature and reflect on the interactions,
they need not believe in prophets. The interactions with Nature are through festivals, ceremonies, etc. There’s an emphasis on
reflecting, and looking inwards so that they can understand Nature’s laws directly.

We say that God can be interpreted as the balance between the feminine and the masculine because in both the common interpretations,
prophet-based and Nature-based, it’s the balance between the feminine and the masculine that’s God. In the prophet-based interpretation,
the prophets (masculine) cause the Nature (feminine) to show God’s presence. In the Nature-based interpretation, Nature, the feminine,
causes the members of the population to become like prophets, the masculine, in order to understand God.
