---js
const title = "Chomsky on journalistic ethics"; const date = "2026-02-16T21:50:00-04:00"; const tags = ["philosophy"]; const draft = true;
---

In this post, we put forth our understanding of Chomsky’s opinion on
journalistic ethics from an interview with Andrew Marr. In the following clip
of an interview with Marr ([full interview on
archive.org](https://archive.org/details/noam-chomsky-1996-02-14-vs-andrew-marr-of-the-big-idea-improved-sound)):

https://youtu.be/VBN7zSPrJ-0

Chomsky critiques the journalistic ethics by saying that Marr would not be
placed where he is unless he believed in certain ideas that the institutions he
was affiliated with filter for. This can be seen in another way, like we have
discussed in [another post](https://m-chaturvedi.github.io/blog/021/), on how
groups exert power: all institutions exert power on individuals by setting a
context within which the members operate, just as Nature sets context via the
forces of gravity, electromagnetism, etc., and exerts forces that lead to laws
which we call the laws of Nature. Living beings that are a part of Nature must
abide by these laws in order to survive.

So, institutions have rules, stated or unstated, which must be followed by the
members. If someone identifies these unspoken rules from the context and starts
questioning or defying them, they soon start being seen as not part of the
group, and their ideas are ignored. They are seen as a rogue agent and are
often mocked first, at least lightly, to conform. If they don’t conform, they
are punished if there are laws of punishment within the group; if not, they are
evicted from the group. We can see the same phenomenon in Nature: if someone
does not conform to the laws of Nature, they either die or don’t procreate,
similar to what happens in a group.

What Chomsky is saying is that in order to propagate their ideas without too
much trouble, many institutions nip this problem in the bud and don’t let in
members who have traits that might lead to questioning or defying the values
that institutions would like to propagate.

Furthermore, we believe that if an institution tries to imitate Nature as
closely as possible, the acceptance criteria would be derived from the laws of
Nature, and eviction from that group would coincide with eviction from Nature,
i.e., with death.
