---js
const title = "On word-action delta"; const date = "2026-04-07T19:50:00-04:00"; const tags = ["philosophy"]; const draft = false;
---

In this post we try to understand why, in our opinion, Russian and Iranian
diplomats sometimes find it difficult to understand their American
counterparts. We think that this arises from a word-action delta. We define
word-action delta to be the difference between the mental model communicated
via words and the mental model communicated via action.

In this post we understand how language can be used in two ways. One way to use
language is to use it with more focus on emotions. So, one assumes that the
other person is close enough to express their emotions and react with their gut
to the words you said. So what you do is, you say something and try to gauge
the emotions created in the other person through the words they use. This
method is often used in social situations, and assumes that the other person
would “react” to what you said with  their real emotions, assuming that they
share a social group with you and are comfortable reacting with their gut.
Certain languages, like English, are more amenable to this method.

The other common way to use language is to use it more like math is used to
describe the world, i.e., with much less focus on emotions. In this way, the
language is not looking to intentionally incite any emotions in the other
person, but is instead trying to just describe one’s intent. In this way, the
person speaking expects the other person also to be using words in the same
way; otherwise, there is miscommunication of intent. When words are used in
this way, they assume that the other person is not looking for an emotional
response but a response with reflection and patience. Certain languages like
Sanskrit are more amenable to this method.

When the first method is used, it can lead to a huge word-action delta. For
example, someone saying “I will kill you,” when using the first method, can
lead to a smile, because the other person assumes that the intention is not
ill-conceived, and the words are being used to incite emotions. But when the
language is being used in the second way, it may lead to the other person
moving away, because they assume that the language is not being used to check
the emotional response, but to convey intent.

A classic example comes to mind in this video of Angela Merkel, saying that the
girl did a great job with her question instead of saying something to stop her
crying. The commentator quickly corrected her understanding and behavior to
save face. This is kind of extreme, but captures the two common ways language
can be used:


https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9qaxoX9MF0M
