---js
const title = "On the health of a country"; const date = "2026-04-13T18:50:00-04:00"; const tags = ["philosophy"]; const draft = false;
---

In this post, we put forth our understanding of the health of a country. Note that we could replace country with any group of people, or even an individual, and the same understanding would apply.

As is defined in Sanskrit, we define health as "being within oneself." In our opinion, the pictorial representation of health is that of the Buddha meditating. He is completely within himself, his inner and outer worlds are in a state of equilibrium.

Similar to the Buddha meditating, a healthy country is at peace both internally and externally. This equilibrium manifests in the following way: a healthy country's native population and the average lifespan of its citizens do not suddenly stop increasing, except because of Natural calamities. Additionally, its population distribution does not suddenly change compared to its past trends, except because of Natural calamities. By Natural calamities, we mean events like the COVID pandemic, tsunamis, etc.

The equivalent of the internal world of a country is its population. The native population of a healthy country does not stop increasing. In addition, two conflicting groups within a country should not threaten each other's existence, populations believing in contradictory ideas should exist in harmony.

The equivalent of the external world of a country is the other countries outside it. A healthy country should not let in people from other countries in ways that disturb its internal harmony. Additionally, it does not go around disturbing other countries and their harmony. It conducts interactions with other countries, such as war, trade, diplomacy, etc., in a way that maintains equilibrium between its internal and external worlds.

All in all, a country needs to act such that sudden changes in its population are determined only by Nature; if it does so, the country is aligned with Natural equilibrium and is healthy.