---js
const title = "On an aspect of Buddhism"; const date = "2026-04-19T20:00:00-04:00"; const tags = ["philosophy", "Buddhism"]; const draft = false;
---

In this post, we put forth our understanding of an aspect of Buddhism, i.e., why Maya is considered the mother of the Buddha. We relate it to our previous post, [on Advaita Vedanta](https://m-chaturvedi.github.io/blog/034/). We emphasize that our understanding is from intuition and not study.

We previously wrote about Maya, the powerful fundamental force that makes us believe that the phenomenal world is real, and how it can be understood instead of experienced via meditation, i.e., by training our minds to achieve a state that does not experience that force, as is colloquially called the enlightened state when experienced continuously.

If we assume that the Buddha is always in that enlightened state, we have two ways to analyze this cause and effect. We can assume that the world as experienced in the enlightened state is the cause of the phenomenal world, or that detachment from the phenomenal world is the cause of the enlightened state.

If we believe that detachment from the phenomenal world is the cause of the enlightened state, i.e., the origin of the Buddha, then the fundamental force causing the phenomenal world to appear real, or, as is generally understood, the force that makes us attached to the phenomenal world, is actually the origin of the Buddha. Because without the force of Maya, there would not be any Buddha. This analysis also matches our previous analysis of [how the origin of everything is from its complement](https://m-chaturvedi.github.io/blog/017/), and in this case the force of Maya is actually the origin of the Buddha.
