---js
const title = "Bhakti yoga and the collective Indian subconscious";
const date = "2026-04-19T23:30:00-04:00";
const tags = ["philosophy"];
const draft = false;
---

In this post, we discuss how we believe Bhakti yoga affects, and has affected
in the past, the collective Indian subconscious. We clarify that we are not
critiquing Bhakti yoga, nor do we consider ourselves qualified to critique it,
but are only attempting to analyze it neutrally.

Bhakti yoga is defined as [1]:

> Bhakti yoga, also called Bhakti marga (literally “the path of bhakti”), is a
> spiritual path or spiritual practice within Hinduism focused on loving
> devotion towards any personal deity.

We note the following observations in the abstract about Bhakti yoga:

1. It assumes a hierarchy, i.e., there exists an entity A, the deity, that is
more powerful than the entity, B, that is the devotee towards that deity.

2. It redirects the emotions of the devotee, B, from materialism towards the
loving spiritual devotion for the deity, A.

3. It teaches practicing detachment from material things.

We believe that this thought-pattern can leave an entire population very
vulnerable if applied towards an entity A that is not a God-like figure. If
this thought-pattern is applied when A is a normal human being, it can lead to
observations like what the late Henry Kissinger said about India in the 1970s.
Note that we interpret the observation in a neutral manner, i.e., after
removing all the nationalistic and possibly racist sentiment, some which
Kissinger apologized for [3], from the quote [2]:


> They are superb flatterers, Mr. President. They are masters at flattery.
> They are masters at subtle flattery. That’s how they survived 600 years. They
> suck up — their great skill is to suck up to people in key positions.

[1] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bhakti_yoga

[2] https://web.archive.org/web/20201003194808/https://www.nytimes.com/2020/09/03/opinion/nixon-racism-india.html

[3] https://archive.is/3Dox8
